Revamp README with improved preamble and restructured quickstart (#108)
streamingfast/substreams-sink-sql: README.md

The Substreams:SQL sink helps you quickly and easily sync Substreams modules to a PostgreSQL or Clickhouse database.

> ## Substreams Output Formats

Reviewer: Let's remove that header, it will go directly under the main header

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)

> The `substreams-sink-sql` supports two different Substreams output formats, each with distinct advantages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It supports two different Substreams output formats, each with distinct advantages:
```

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)

### Relational Mappings (Recommended)

> **How it works:** Tables and rows are extracted dynamically from Protobuf messages using annotations for table and relation mappings. This approach leverages Substreams' built-in relational mapping capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tables and rows are extracted dynamically from Protobuf messages using annotations for table and relation mappings. This approach leverages Substreams' built-in relational mapping capabilities.
```

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)

**Pros:**
- **Less development work** - No need to manually emit database changes in your Substreams code
- **Automatic schema inference** - Tables and relationships are derived from your Protobuf definitions
- **Type safety** - Protobuf annotations ensure data consistency

> - **Easier maintenance** - Schema changes are managed through Protobuf definitions

Reviewer: Let add also that its faster in most scenarios, due to possibility to perform bulk inserts more easily.

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)

**Cons:**
- **Less control** - Limited flexibility in how data is structured in the database

> - **Learning curve** - Requires understanding of Protobuf annotations and relational mappings

Reviewer: Remove that one, replace by `**Insert Only** - Does not support update/delete of rows, it's an insert-only method of ingestion`

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)

### Database Changes

> **How it works:** Tables and rows are extracted from Substreams modules that directly emit database changes using [`sf.substreams.sink.database.v1.DatabaseChanges`](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-sink-database-changes?tab=readme-ov-file#substreams-sink-database-changes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tables and rows are extracted from Substreams modules that directly emit database changes using [`sf.substreams.sink.database.v1.DatabaseChanges`](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-sink-database-changes?tab=readme-ov-file#substreams-sink-database-changes).
```

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)

**Pros:**
- **Full control** - Complete flexibility over database structure and operations
- **Custom logic** - Can implement complex business logic for data transformation

> - **Performance optimization** - Can optimize database operations for specific use cases

Reviewer: Let's remove that one.

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)

**Cons:**
- **More development work** - Requires manually implementing database change logic
- **Error-prone** - More opportunities for bugs in manual database operations
- **Maintenance overhead** - Schema changes require code updates

> **Recommendation:** Start with **Relational Mappings** for most use cases as it requires significantly less development effort while providing robust functionality.

Reviewer: Let's remove that.

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)

2. Start Docker Compose in the background:

   ```bash
   docker compose up -d
   ```

   > You can wipe the database and restart from scratch by doing `docker compose down` and `rm -rf ./devel/data/postgres`.

3. Set up environment variables for convenience:

   ```bash
   export PG_DSN="psql://dev-node:insecure-change-me-in-prod@localhost:5432/dev-node?sslmode=disable"
   export CLICKHOUSE_DSN="clickhouse://default:default@localhost:9000/default"
   ```

   > **Note** To connect to Substreams you will need an authentication token, follow this [guide](https://substreams.streamingfast.io/reference-and-specs/authentication) to obtain one.

## Quickstart Relational Mappings

### Postgres

1. Set up the database schema:

   ```bash
   substreams-sink-sql setup $PG_DSN solana-spl-token@v0.1.3
   ```

2. Run the sink:

   ```bash
   substreams-sink-sql run $PG_DSN solana-spl-token@v0.1.3
   ```

### Clickhouse

1. Set up the database schema:

   ```bash
   substreams-sink-sql setup $CLICKHOUSE_DSN solana-spl-token@v0.1.3
   ```

2. Run the sink:

   ```bash
   substreams-sink-sql run $CLICKHOUSE_DSN solana-spl-token@v0.1.3
   ```

> 

Reviewer: That is all wrong, those are command for Database Changes only. Please fix the Relational Mappings section by consulting https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-spl-token?tab=readme-ov-file#quick-start-with-clickhouse to know how to properly run `substreams-sink-sql from-proto`.

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)

## Quickstart Database Changes

### Postgres

1. Set up the database schema:

   ```bash
   substreams-sink-sql setup $PG_DSN https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/releases/download/v0.3.1/substreams-template-v0.3.1.spkg
   ```

2. Run the sink:

   ```bash
   substreams-sink-sql run $PG_DSN https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/releases/download/v0.3.1/substreams-template-v0.3.1.spkg

>    ```

Reviewer: Merge those two steps into a single one. Also replace https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/releases/download/v0.3.1/substreams-template-v0.3.1.spkg by short notation `substreams-template@v0.3.1`

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)

### Clickhouse

1. Set up the database schema:

   ```bash
   substreams-sink-sql setup $CLICKHOUSE_DSN https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/releases/download/v0.3.1/substreams-template-v0.3.1.spkg
   ```

2. Run the sink:

   ```bash
   substreams-sink-sql run $CLICKHOUSE_DSN https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/releases/download/v0.3.1/substreams-template-v0.3.1.spkg

>    ```

Reviewer: Merge steps and also adjust substreams-template to run using short notation.

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)

- Update README and CHANGELOG to add information about the new dialect
- Open a PR

### Output Module Requirements

The `substreams-sink-sql` accepts two types of Substreams output modules:

#### Database Changes Modules

For the **Database Changes** approach, your module output type must be [`sf.substreams.sink.database.v1.DatabaseChanges`](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-sink-database-changes/blob/develop/proto/sf/substreams/sink/database/v1/database.proto#L7). 

**Development Resources:**
- **Rust**: Use the [`substreams-database-change`](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-database-change) crate for bindings and helpers
- **Examples**: See [`substreams-eth-block-meta`](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-eth-block-meta/blob/master/src/lib.rs#L35) and its [db_out.rs helper](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-eth-block-meta/blob/master/src/db_out.rs#L6)

By convention, the module that emits `DatabaseChanges` is named `db_out`.

> > **Version Note**: When using older versions (0.2.0, 0.1.*) of `substreams-database-change`, use `substreams.database.v1.DatabaseChanges` in your `substreams.yaml` manifest.

Reviewer: Do not specify that, instead, just emphasis that everyone should use the latest version of DatabseChanges and ensure they specify the right version. The legacy supported version should not be mentioned anywhere.

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)

#### Relational Mappings Modules

For the **Relational Mappings** approach, your module can output any Protobuf message type. The sink automatically extracts table and row data from your Protobuf messages using annotations and field mappings.

**Examples:**
- **Solana SPL Token**: [`solana-spl-token@v0.1.3`](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-spl-token) - demonstrates relational mapping extraction from SPL token data

> - **Foundational Modules**: Browse the [Substreams Foundational Modules](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-foundational-modules) repository for more examples

Reviewer: Remove that.

> Reviewing and updating the docs as requested! 📝
> 
> 💻 [View my work](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490) • [🛑 Stop](https://codegen.com/agent/trace/101490/stop)
